{
  "title": "Optimize Your Development Process for Humans",
  "published": "2014-12-18 11:20",
  "categories": ["Development"],
  "authors": ["Paul Bailey"]
}

As developers and engineers we love to optimize things whether it be code or processes. And since we are technically oriented, we often focus on the technical issues and kind of forget about the human element. We think if we can just make the best process or write the best code, things will just work naturally. We often need to step back and ask, "this process is air tight, but does anyone actually like it?" You can have the best development process in the universe, and if the developers using it, hate it, you are either going to be unsuccessful or extremely slow with your project.

The Agile Development movement is a good example of this. What is the first thing that you think of when you think of Agile? Scrums, extreme programming, sprints? Most developers I meet hate these processes now. Scrums, what developer likes meetings? Now you have to do one everyday! Sprints, there is a reason why you don't sprint constantly in real life, you get burned out. Now as developers we have to sprint all the time? These are all processes, meant to improve code but forget about the environment people have to work in. And the sad thing about Agile is the original manifesto stated "Individuals and Interactions over Processes and Tools" and the first thing that comes to mind when I hear the word "Agile" are processes and tools.

Agile is a great example of trying to push things to fast, but we also have to worry about going to slow. Often code reviews can become a nitpick fest of things that don't matter. And we can have people that block code because they hold all the knowlegde. So while your code review nitpicks may keep your code really tight, it also teaches your developers to move slowly. Or maybe it is not your code reviews that are slowing people down, but an overly complicated development process that you need to simplify. The medical profession is in a crisis right now because doctors are dropping out and there are not enough to replace them. One the biggest reasons sited for doctors dropping out is the fact that they spend most of their time doing paperwork or admin duties and not being a doctors. Developers want to code, let them do what they love. If your developers don't spend the majority of their time coding then you need to look at changing. Is your development process complex, simpilify it today. Are your code reviews slowing everyone down, find ways to delegate or speed them up with automated checks.

You need to find a pace and process of development for your team that it enjoys. Once you find that, I think you'll be able create quality code and most likely be able to increase your speed as your team grows. Lastly, start getting to know your team individually and research ways to promote happiness. This is not about treating your developers like Rockstars, but about providing an environment where they can grow and provide the best value. Some people need more freedom to make desisions while others might need more hand holding. Find this information out and optimize. Just remember, before process and code, comes people.